projects/AIC003-osteoporosis.md, before:

---
layout: project_description
title: Work
description: What we'll do, are doing, have done
---


# **Osteoporosis**

| <b>Project Title</b> | Cross modality identification of vertebral compression fractures in the identification of background population osteoporosis |
| <b>Clinical lead(s)</b> |  |
| <b>CSC lead</b> | [Dika](/team/dika.md) |
| <b>Rationale</b> | 77% of scans with vertebral compression fractures are correctly identified and 43% scans recommend referrals – both of these numbers can be improved with AI tool. |
| <b>Modality</b> | CT first, then x-ray, then MRI. |
| <b>Pathology</b> | Vertebral compression fractures (spine) |
| <b>Description</b> | Background osteoporosis is easily treatable if identified, but can lead to complex fractures at other sites if undiagnosed, especially in the hip where a > 50% mortality at 12 months over the age of 80. Currently, 70% of vertebral compression fractures are undiagnosed though they are the most common osteoporotic fracture. This project would work in conjunction with the current fracture liaison service quality improvement project. |
| <b>Patient pathway</b> | Incidental findings, patients present for imaging for other reasons. |
| <b>Training datasets</b> | Clinical datasets are available (CT, MRI, x-rays). Imaging usually performed for other indications. |
| <b>Consequences of errors</b> | A timely identification of vertebral compression fractures which indicate osteoporosis allows the clinicians to refer the patient for osteoporosis treatment. If the osteoporosis signs are missed and the patient sustains a fracture, the fracture is complex and carries a high rate of mortality in older patients. |
| <b>Goals</b> | Increased rates of identification and treatment referrals after identification to reduce occurrence of complex fractures in other sites. |
| <b>Criteria for success</b> | Increased referrals and identifications of vertebral compression fractures. |
| <b>Commercial products available</b> | <a href="http://www.gleamer.ai/"> Gleamer </a> |
| <b>Project Plan</b> | 1.	Meeting of all persons involved to determine AI specifications. <br><br> 2.	Setting technical and system requirements for AI model. <br> <br> 3. Dataset curation (retrospective). <br><br> 4.	Model training<br><br>5.	Model testing <br><br>6.	Implementation <br><br>7. Audit|
| <b>References</b> |  |

Commit message:

Updates to kanban and osteoporosis and xray fracture projects
I've updated the kanban for AIC002, AIC003, AIC005 and AIC010 to reflect where they currently are in the lifecycle. Details to current project status added to AIC002 and AIC003. References added to both.

projects/AIC003-osteoporosis.md, after:

---
layout: project_description
title: Work
description: What we'll do, are doing, have done
---


# **Osteoporosis**

| <b>Project Title</b> | Cross modality identification of vertebral compression fractures in the identification of background population osteoporosis |
| <b>Clinical lead(s)</b> |  |
| <b>CSC lead</b> | [Dika](/team/dika.md) |
| <b>AI Centre Number</b> | AIC003 |
| <b>Rationale</b> | 77% of scans with vertebral compression fractures are correctly identified and 43% scans recommend referrals – both of these numbers can be improved with AI tool. |
| <b>Modality</b> | CT first, then x-ray, then MRI. |
| <b>Pathology</b> | Vertebral compression fractures (spine) |
| <b>Description</b> | Background osteoporosis is easily treatable if identified, but can lead to complex fractures at other sites if undiagnosed, especially in the hip where a > 50% mortality at 12 months over the age of 80. Currently, 70% of vertebral compression fractures are undiagnosed though they are the most common osteoporotic fracture. This project would work in conjunction with the current fracture liaison service quality improvement project. |
| <b>Patient pathway</b> | Incidental findings, patients present for imaging for other reasons. |
| <b>Training datasets</b> | Clinical datasets are available (CT, MRI, x-rays). Imaging usually performed for other indications. |
| <b>Consequences of errors</b> | A timely identification of vertebral compression fractures which indicate osteoporosis allows the clinicians to refer the patient for osteoporosis treatment. If the osteoporosis signs are missed and the patient sustains a fracture, the fracture is complex and carries a high rate of mortality in older patients. |
| <b>Goals</b> | Increased rates of identification and treatment referrals after identification to reduce occurrence of complex fractures in other sites. |
| <b>Criteria for success</b> | Increased referrals and identifications of vertebral compression fractures. |
| <b>Commercial products available</b> | <a href="https://www.zebra-med.com/bone-health-solution"> ZebraMed</a>. Retrospective and prospective trials are planned to take place in the early 2021. The results will determine whether this clinical problem will be solved with ZebraMed's BoneHealth solution. |
| <b>Project Plan</b> | <strike>1.	Meeting of all persons involved to determine AI specifications.</strike> <br><br> 2.	Agreeing on technical specifications, success criteria and evaluation plan. <br> <br> 3. Dataset curation (retrospective) -- approximately 1000 CTs with spine in field of view, patients > 55 years. Cogstack to be used for cohort selection. <br><br> 4.	Retrospective evaluation (3 weeks, 1000 scans)<br><br>5.	Prospective evaluation live in clinic (2 months) <br><br>6.	Analysis of evaluation results: if successful, then procurement, if unsuccessful, change strategy. After the completion of CTs, we will move on to solve the same problems using other modalities. <br><br>7. Audit|
| <b>References</b> | <a href="https://research-information.bris.ac.uk/ws/portalfiles/portal/282788915/1759720x211024029.pdf">Opportunistic diagnosis of osteoporosis, fragile bone strength and vertebral fractures from routine CT scans; a review of approved technology systems and pathways to implementation: a Review of Approved Technology Systems and Pathways to Implementation.</a> |
