projects/AIC002-occult-carpal-detection-xray.md, before:

---
layout: project_description
title: Work
description: What we'll do, are doing, have done
---

# **Carpal fracture detection in x-ray**

| <b>Project Title</b> | Fracture: Occult Carpal Detection in X-Ray -- Next Steps post TOHETI |
| <b>Clinical lead(s)</b> |  |
| <b>CSC lead</b> | [Dika](/team/dika.html) |
| <b>Rationale</b> | MRI is superior in identification of occult carpal fracture, but is not always accessible. An AI tool to aide clinical diagnosis of occult carpal fractures using x-rays would increase diagnostic sensitivity in areas and situations where MRI is not available.  |
| <b>Modality</b> | X-ray |
| <b>Pathology</b> | Occult carpal fractures (wrists and hands) |
| <b>Description</b> | A computer aided diagnosis tool which would automatically run when either a scaphoid fracture is suspected or if a patient is referred for a hand/wrist x-ray from A&E would increase sensitivity and confidence of diagnosis. Carpal fractures can be difficult to identify and patients with high clinical suspicion are put in a splint and referred to the fracture clinic even if a fracture isn’t seen on the x-ray by the clinician. Subtle lucency of an un-displaced fracture and the significance of a small bone fragment is currently easily missed. A successful tool would therefore increase diagnostic confidence and accuracy and reduce repeated x-rays and needless fracture clinic referrals. |
| <b>Patient pathway</b> | A&E attendance with a suspected scaphoid fracture or hand/wrist injury. |
| <b>Training datasets</b> | TOHETI dataset (held by the health technology analyst) of patients who attended A&E with suspected scaphoid fracture (n=132) of which (n=67) have an MRI too. |
| <b>Consequences of errors</b> | Needless referrals to fracture clinic and needless immobilisation in patients who do not have a fracture; repeated x-rays; referrals to MRI. |
| <b>Goals</b> | An automated computer aided diagnosis tool triggered when appropriate x-rays are taken. |
| <b>Criteria for success</b> | Improvement in diagnostic accuracy and diagnostic speed. |
| <b>Commercial products available</b> | <a href="http://www.gleamer.ai/"> Gleamer </a> |
| <b>Other considerations</b> | Suboptimal views are difficult to interpret. Background of arthritis can make small fractures difficult to see. |
| <b>Project Plan</b> | 1.	Meeting of all persons involved to determine AI specifications. <br><br> 2.	Setting technical and system requirements for AI model. <br> <br> 3. Dataset curation (retrospective). <br><br> 4.	Model training<br><br>5.	Model testing <br><br>6.	Implementation <br><br>7. Audit|
| <b>References</b> |  |

Commit message:

Updates to kanban and osteoporosis and xray fracture projects
I've updated the kanban for AIC002, AIC003, AIC005 and AIC010 to reflect where they currently are in the lifecycle. Details to current project status added to AIC002 and AIC003. References added to both.

projects/AIC002-occult-carpal-detection-xray.md, after:

---
layout: project_description
title: Work
description: What we'll do, are doing, have done
---

# **Carpal fracture detection in x-ray**

| <b>Project Title</b> | Fracture: Occult Carpal Detection in X-Ray -- Next Steps post TOHETI |
| <b>Clinical lead(s)</b> |  |
| <b>CSC lead</b> | [Dika](/team/dika.html) |
| <b>AI Centre Number</b> | AIC002 |
| <b>Rationale</b> | MRI is superior in identification of occult carpal fracture, but is not always accessible. An AI tool to aide clinical diagnosis of occult carpal fractures using x-rays would increase diagnostic sensitivity in areas and situations where MRI is not available.  |
| <b>Modality</b> | X-ray |
| <b>Pathology</b> | Occult carpal fractures (wrists and hands) |
| <b>Description</b> | A computer aided diagnosis tool which would automatically run when either a scaphoid fracture is suspected or if a patient is referred for a hand/wrist x-ray from A&E would increase sensitivity and confidence of diagnosis. Carpal fractures can be difficult to identify and patients with high clinical suspicion are put in a splint and referred to the fracture clinic even if a fracture isn’t seen on the x-ray by the clinician. Subtle lucency of an un-displaced fracture and the significance of a small bone fragment is currently easily missed. A successful tool would therefore increase diagnostic confidence and accuracy and reduce repeated x-rays and needless fracture clinic referrals. |
| <b>Patient pathway</b> | A&E attendance with a suspected scaphoid fracture or hand/wrist injury. |
| <b>Training datasets</b> | Patient cohort identified using CogStack looking for phrases 'scaphoid' and 'MRI clinical'. The query generated a list of approximately 1000 patients who have had an MRI, with the view that all patients who had an MRI will also have had an x-ray. The patient list is now being stratified to `test`, `control` and `back-up` groups. |
| <b>Consequences of errors</b> | Needless referrals to fracture clinic and needless immobilisation in patients who do not have a fracture; repeated x-rays; referrals to MRI. |
| <b>Goals</b> | An automated computer aided diagnosis tool triggered when appropriate x-rays are taken. |
| <b>Criteria for success</b> | Improvement in diagnostic accuracy and diagnostic speed. |
| <b>Commercial products available</b> | <a href="http://www.gleamer.ai/">Gleamer</a>, which specialise in trauma x-rays, has been considered for this purpose but was decided not suitable to solve this particular clinical problem. The decision was made to train an in-house algorithm instead. |
| <b>Other considerations</b> | Suboptimal views are difficult to interpret. Background of arthritis can make small fractures difficult to see. |
| <b>Project Plan</b> | <strike>1.	Meeting of all persons involved to determine AI specifications. <br><br> 2.	Setting technical and system requirements for AI model. </strike> <br> <br> 3. Dataset curation (retrospective). <br><br> 4.	Model training<br><br>5.	Model testing <br><br>6.	Implementation <br><br>7. Audit|
| <b>References</b> | <a href="https://online.boneandjoint.org.uk/doi/full/10.1302/0301-620X.101B8.BJJ-2018-1590.R1"> TOHETI trial results </a> |
